docs/source/how_to_guides/add_custom_dataset.md, before:

# Add a Custom Dataset

This guide explains how to integrate your own dataset into CZ Benchmarks.

## Requirements

- For single-cell models, the dataset must conform to AnnData standards in `.h5ad` file format.
- Ensure the dataset meets the validation requirements of the models that the dataset will be used to benchmark. For AnnData datasets, this means ensuring that `obs` and `var` each contain the required metadata columns, as specified by each model's `available_organisms`, `required_obs_keys` and `required_var_keys` properties.


## Steps to Add Your Dataset

### 1. Prepare Your Data

- Save your data as an AnnData object in `.h5ad` format.
- Ensure the following:
  - Metadata columns (e.g., cell type, batch) are included in `obs`.
  - Gene names are properly defined in `var`.

### 2. Create a Custom Configuration File

- Create a YAML file (e.g., `custom.yaml`) with the following structure:

```yaml
datasets:
  my_dataset:
    _target_: czbenchmarks.datasets.SingleCellDataset
    path: ~/path_to_your_data/my_data.h5ad
    organism: ${organism:HUMAN}
```

- **Explanation:**
  - `datasets`: Defines the datasets to be loaded.
  - `my_dataset`: A unique identifier for your dataset.
  - `_target_`: Specifies the `Dataset` class to instantiate. Currently, `cz-benchmarks` supports `src.czbenchmarks.datasets.single_cell.SingleCellDataset` and `src.czbenchmarks.datasets.single_cell.PerturbationSingleCellDataset` Dataset types.
  - `path`: Path to your `.h5ad` file. This may be be a local filesystem path or an S3 URL (`s3://...`).
  - `organism`: Specify the organism, which must be a value from the `src.czbenchmarks.datasets.types.Organism` (e.g., HUMAN, MOUSE).

  You may add multiple datasets to thie files, as children of `datasets`.

### 3. Load and Validate Your Dataset in Python

- Use the following Python code to load your dataset:

```python
from czbenchmarks.datasets.utils import load_dataset

# Instantiate the `SingleCellDataset` object from the configuration specified in `custom.yaml`
dataset = load_dataset("my_dataset", config_path="custom.yaml")

# Load the H5AD file into memory as an AnnData object, storing in the `ANNDATA` input "slot" of the dataset.
dataset.load_data()

# Ensure the basic requirements are met by the Dataset
dataset.validate()
print(dataset.get_input("ANNDATA"))
```

Fix any loading or validation errors, as needed.

## Tips for Customization

- **Preprocessing:** If your dataset requires specialized preprocessing, consider subclassing `BaseDataset` in your project.
- **Validation:** Ensure organism-specific validations (e.g. gene name prefixes) are met.
- **Test with Models:** Specific models may have additional validation requirements, so you will need to invoke applicable models with your specific dataset to ensure that it is fully compliant.

Commit message:

update custom dataset doc instruction
use the standard datasets.yaml config to allow the dataset to be used via the CLI

docs/source/how_to_guides/add_custom_dataset.md, after:

# Add a Custom Dataset

This guide explains how to integrate your own dataset into CZ Benchmarks.

## Requirements

- For single-cell models, the dataset must conform to AnnData standards in `.h5ad` file format.
- Ensure the dataset meets the validation requirements of the models that the dataset will be used to benchmark. For AnnData datasets, this means ensuring that `obs` and `var` each contain the required metadata columns, as specified by each model's `available_organisms`, `required_obs_keys` and `required_var_keys` properties.


## Steps to Add Your Dataset

### 1. Prepare Your Data

- Save your data as an AnnData object in `.h5ad` format.
- Ensure the following:
  - Metadata columns (e.g., cell type, batch) are included in `obs`.
  - Gene names are properly defined in `var`.

### 2. Create a Custom Configuration File

- Update `src/czbenchmarks/conf/datasets.yaml`) by adding a new dataset entry:

```yaml
datasets:
  ...

  my_dataset:
    _target_: czbenchmarks.datasets.SingleCellDataset
    path: ~/path_to_your_data/my_data.h5ad
    organism: ${organism:HUMAN}
```

- **Explanation:**
  - `datasets`: Defines the datasets to be loaded.
  - `my_dataset`: A unique identifier for your dataset.
  - `_target_`: Specifies the `Dataset` class to instantiate. Currently, `cz-benchmarks` supports `src.czbenchmarks.datasets.single_cell.SingleCellDataset` and `src.czbenchmarks.datasets.single_cell.PerturbationSingleCellDataset` Dataset types.
  - `path`: Path to your `.h5ad` file. This may be be a local filesystem path or an S3 URL (`s3://...`).
  - `organism`: Specify the organism, which must be a value from the `src.czbenchmarks.datasets.types.Organism` (e.g., HUMAN, MOUSE).

  You may add multiple datasets to thie files, as children of `datasets`.

### 3. Load and Validate Your Dataset in Python

- Use the following Python code to load your dataset:

```python
from czbenchmarks.datasets.utils import load_dataset

# Instantiate the `SingleCellDataset` object from the configuration specified in `datasets.yaml`
dataset = load_dataset("my_dataset")

# Load the H5AD file into memory as an AnnData object, storing in the `ANNDATA` input "slot" of the dataset.
dataset.load_data()

# Ensure the basic requirements are met by the Dataset
dataset.validate()
print(dataset.get_input("ANNDATA"))
```

Fix any loading or validation errors, as needed.

## Tips for Customization

- **Preprocessing:** If your dataset requires specialized preprocessing, consider subclassing `BaseDataset` in your project.
- **Validation:** Ensure organism-specific validations (e.g. gene name prefixes) are met.
- **Test with Models:** Specific models may have additional validation requirements, so you will need to invoke applicable models with your specific dataset to ensure that it is fully compliant.
